Global losses of biodiversity alter interactions amongst hosts and pathogens, and in turn, affect disease dynamics. Uncovering the mechanisms underlying relationships between diversity and disease risk is essential for predicting and managing emerging outbreaks. It is also critical to understand how decisions that researchers make, such as how to measure disease risk, may affect inference in diversity-disease patterns. 

In my dissertation, I seek to understand why diversity (sometimes) limits disease risk. I focused on two pathosystems: an invasive forest disease impacting natural plant communities, the other a model system consisting of crop seedlings and an agricultural fungal pathogen. The forest disease is caused by Phytophthora ramorum, a generalist pathogen that has killed millions of tanoak and oak trees along the coast of California and southwestern Oregon. Studying disease in natural systems is powerful for understanding linkages among community composition, host competence (i.e. the ability to acquire infections and contribute to transmission), and various metrics of disease.

In chapter 1, I quantified the sporulation potential of common plant species inhabiting the Big Sur region of coastal California. These lab-based competence assays indicated that bay laurel and tanoak produced large quantities of sporangia; all remaining species produced much less. These results are important for understanding the pathogen’s basic biology, trajectory of SOD in a changing environment, and the role of the entire host community in pathogen transmission.

In chapter 2, I studied natural forests infested by sudden oak death to empirically evaluate hypotheses underlying previously observed negative diversity-disease relationships. In order to understand how the whole host community might contribute to transmission risk, I leveraged data from the sporulation assays in Chapter 1, and augmented it to plant community and disease field data from a large forest monitoring plot network. I demonstrated that aggregating disease observations at the community-level can lead to misinterpretations of dilution mechanisms, bias towards a negative diversity-disease relationship, and through review of the dilution effect literature, I found that this oversight is surprisingly common. 

In chapter 3, I used a tractable plant-fungal pathosystem to test how community assembly influences the direction of the diversity-disease relationship. By planting and inoculating mesocosms in a greenhouse, I examined how variation in overall species densities and species loss order along a richness gradient affects disease risk. Consistent with theoretical expectations, richness only limited disease when species loss order negatively correlated with host competence and overall species density was intransient with richness. When species density positively correlated with richness or species loss order was random, richness had either a positive or negligible association with disease. 


